I thank my fianc\'{e}e Phoebe for all the love and support she has
given me during our years in graduate school. Without her by my side I
could not have gotten where I am today.

My advisor, David W.~Hogg, has been the greatest mentor I could have
asked for. He introduced me to a field I had never thought of entering
before and showed me how wonderful and exciting it is. He allowed me
to find my own way while always being available for guidance and
discussion. For all that and much more I thank him.

I would like to thank my mother for her continued support and
encouragement. I also thank my brother.

My special thanks also go to Phoebe's parents, Ellen and Charles.

My classmates at NYU, especially Jeff Allen, Keith Chan, Ilias Cholis,
Lisa Goodenough, Ronnie Jansson, Tao Jiang, Eyal Kazin, Jonathan
Zrake, Sjoert van Velzen, Ronin Wu, Guangtun Zhu, Adi Zolotov, deserve
a special mention for providing an intellectually stimulating
environment. I also thank the members of my thesis committee: Michael
Blanton, Kyle Cranmer, Andrei Gruzinov, and Matt Kleban.

I am very thankful to Hans-Walter Rix for his support and advice. I
have also benefitted greatly from conversations, discussions, comments
on papers, and assistance from the following people: Fr{\'e}d{\'e}ric
Arenou, Michael Aumer, Coryn Bailer-Jones, James Binney, Anthony
Brown, Daniela Carollo, Ilias Cholis, Walter Dehnen, Mulin Ding,
Glennys Farrar, Ken Freeman, Stefan Gillessen, Kathryn Johnston, Joe
Hennawi, Dustin Lang, Floor van Leeuwen, Yuri Levin, Stephen Levine,
Tom Loredo, Dmitry Malyshev, Phil Marshall, Surhud More, John
Moustakas, Iain Murray, Adam Myers, Bill Press, Mark Reid, Sam Roweis,
Kevin Schlaufman, Erin Sheldon, Michael Strauss, Scott Tremaine, Glenn
van de Ven, Neal Weiner, and a few anonymous referees.

The research described in this dissertation was supported partially by
the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (ADP grant
NNX08AJ48G), the National Science Foundation (grant AST-0908357), the
Max-Planck-Institut f\"ur Astronomie, a New York University Horizon
fellowship, and a Horizon Dissertation writing fellowship. I would
also like to acknowledge the hospitality of The Max-Planck-Institut
f\"ur Astronomie and the Lorentz Center in Leiden.



